Let us firstly say thank you to Heritage Lottery Wales for supporting this short project of
memories of people who lived and were from Butetown, Tiger Bay, the docks.
And I hope you find the time to listen to it fully.
This next one is from Dold Salomon.
My name is Dold Salomon. My dad was Ali Salomon, who ran the Cairo Calf at 236 Bute Street.
I was born and raised in Butetown and I still spend most of my time in Butetown.
Let me interrupt very briefly there the conversation with Dold.
This next clip is from a BBC program in 2011. It was originally recorded in 1968.
And I don't think he, and he doesn't know I'm putting this into the podcast.
This is Dold's mother, Olive Salomon, talking about bumping into his father outside the Cairo Café when she was 15.
And she was a nurse on her way back from the cinema. And she was from the valleys.
My dad had just opened up the Cairo Café, not long, and he happened to be standing outside on the front door.
I stopped and asked this boy then the way to Queen Street. And he said I was losing my way to the docks.
And we started talking. I think we fell in love there and then.
We got married when I was 16 and three weeks actually. I had five children before I was 21.
We got, we had ten children, five boys and five girls.
Of course when I got married there was a great stir at home because the priest from the church even came and told my mother that
marrying an Arab, I was marrying a heathen. There was quite a stir at home.
Let's return to the interview with Dold, which was recorded by the way during lockdown on the 24th of February 2021.
Now to mention a bit about Butone, when I was born and grew up in Butone, it was a unique place.
We had people there from every part of the world. Everybody treated their neighbors and friends.
We were all welcome. Nobody looked at the color of anybody.
You didn't even think of the color of this person was a different color to be on. That person was a different color.
We looked at people and took them for what they were. And people didn't have a lot in those days.
But what they had, they were prepared to share with one another.
If somebody was in trouble, people would run to their aid and try to help them as best they could.
You had many people described Butone as a place not to go to.
But you had some of the nicest people in the world you could ever meet or come across.
Growing up, we had no problems in Butone.
It was when we went over the bridge and through the traffic lights into outside Butone that we encountered people abusing us, calling us names and things.
We weren't bad people, but we were able to defend ourselves. And defend ourselves we did.
We put a lot of those problems with ignorance and lack of knowledge.
Because later on, we became friends with those people and we all grew up.
A lot of people succeeded in businesses and whatnot. But we managed to keep a friendship going.
No, today, rather when they began to demolish Butone, they split up a very tight community.
And people were sent out to these new estates while they were knocking down the buildings.
And there were some beautiful buildings there.
If the government could have only had foresight and redeveloped those homes, it would have been lovely.
They were beautiful buildings. They had character.
But then they decided to build what we've got there today.
And it's a different place altogether now.
Those people left and went to other communities.
And the community was split.
And then, you know, to rub people's face in it, they brought other troublesome families from outside of Butone to Butone.
And those people had a bit of respect, to respect the elderly.
And we did. But the place is not the same, though.
Butone's not the same.
And it was a great place to grow up in.
It didn't matter what religion you were or what country you came from.
Everybody was treated exactly the same.
And we all took part in our religious festivals and whatnot.
The Christian sector of the community would come and celebrate with us at the end of Ramadan.
And, you know, we'd cook lots of food and share it with the community.
People used to look forward to it. It was nice.
Even on the Wits and Treats, there'd be more kids in Sunday school, more Muslim kids, than Christians, to get a ticket to go on the Wits and Treats.
You know, this is how it was.
Nobody got turned away because they were a different faith or anything.
We were all one. And they were good, happy days.
And in those days, we used to go on the Wits and Treats on the back of a lorry.
We had clacks, transport.
We used to provide the church with a couple of wagons, and they'd put all the church pews on the back.
And that's what we said. They probably couldn't do it today.
But they were good days. And we went off into the countryside and had a nice day.
For the kids, that would have just been an adventure.
Oh, oh, God. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, everybody used to look forward to it coming.
It was great. And there was no hassle. You know, it was lovely.
One of my early memories of the bay is my uncle Darwin, Darwin Hinds.
Oh, I know Darwin. I knew Darwin.
Yeah, my uncle Darwin brought me down to the mosque when I was a kid.
Yeah. Yeah. Well, Darwin, you know, he was a special person in itself
because he was very big friends with our late Checksite.
And they were very close.
And Delgado and that, they were all sort of pals together.
And Darwin converted to Islam.
That's right. I mean, he was a wonderful leader, Checksite, a wonderful leader.
He was a wonderful man, you know, difficult to replace.
Well, we never replaced him, you know. He was a special person.
And Darwin contributed a lot to his faith in Cardiff and in Barry.
Yeah. Yeah.
Because he enabled us to purchase the old police station there.
And that was converted into a place of prayer, mosque.
You know, Darwin helped us a great deal in doing that.
They were good days. They were good days, the old days.
Things have changed and I don't think it's for the better.
It was much better in those days than what it is now.
Where did you go to school, Don?
I went to school South Church Street.
That was just across the road from St. Mary's Church there up on Bute Street.
It was in South Church Street and the school was called South Church Street,
which the majority of the Bute Town families, they all went there.
And we had some very special people as well who did well for themselves.
And they all started off in South Church Street.
You know, Billy Boston, fantastic rugby player.
He represented the community.
And yet because of his colour, he was denied to play with whales.
I mean, later on, he was well capable of playing for whales and he would have done well.
But you have these stupid, I don't know what you say,
people who use colour and whatnot to prevent somebody getting on in life.
The trouble with Billy Boston and Freeman and a load of them is
not only were they black, but they were also working class.
That's right, exactly.
Which is one of the reasons all the white people who were in the bay got on with the black people.
They were all working class.
Yeah, exactly.
We were all one.
We didn't see anybody was better than the other all.
We were all the same.
And like later on, Billy Boston, he was lucky enough that the Scouts came along
and he was playing with the kayaks and they picked him and took him up north.
And the people up there in Wigan, they loved him.
They took him into their house and he did them prog.
And it was because of his ability to play rugby, not because of his colour or anything.
They appreciated him for what he did and they loved him.
But today we've got problems with the youth.
They've got nothing to do.
The clubs are all closed and they're hanging about on the streets with nothing to do
and they get into a bit of mischief from time to time.
Other people have mentioned Chalky White's place.
Oh, Chalky White, he kept them in hand.
He was brilliant.
He run the youth club there and he did a great job.
He would take no messing off.
Nobody like you, you all came in and listened to the rules and regulations.
As long as you stood by them, you were fine.
But if you crossed, he could deal with you.
He was a great man.
One of the things that worked was when the parents handed over the kid to Chalky White,
it was clear he's the man in charge.
Yes, that's right.
He was trusted and he always looked out for the benefit of the youth.
And this is why he got on with the youth.
He wanted to help the youth get on and make something of their lives and whatnot.
And he did all he could to help them.
He was a great man.
What was it like when you left school and you were trying to get work?
What was that like?
Well, in those days, in the docks, because the majority of people were OXC men and whatnot,
the thing was that when you left school, everybody wanted to go away to sea.
I went down to the shipping federation and I got the forms to join up as a merchant seaman.
And my dad had to sign the papers.
And I took it back home to my dad and my dad looked at it and he ripped the papers up.
That's what he thought were my choice.
But he said to me, go and see if you can find an apprenticeship and learn something and do something with your life.
And funny enough, the next day, there was a lot of industry in Cardiff in those days.
And I went out the following day and I found a job as an apprentice fitter turner.
I was so happy because I walked in very cheekily.
And the guy that gave me the job, he worked in a company called Trouble Cane Foundry and Engineering.
And it was a top company.
They, I think, the propeller for the first Queen Elizabeth was cast there.
They did a lot of, you know, they were the foundry, they cast the material there and then went into the machine shop for machining.
And then he was a French guy who looked after the engine sector.
They built these old pumps and generators and whatnot there.
They'd taken over a company called Imperial Keighley from up north.
And he was in charge of building all these engines, different types of engines, which were sent all over the world, you know, countries like third world countries.
There were lots in Brazil, in Peru, those kind of places, and they used them for all sorts of things.
I got a job with him and he took me in hand, gave me the job and he looked after me throughout my apprenticeship.
And when I was four and a half years into my apprenticeship, I approached Reardon Smith, which was an old shipping company in Cardiff,
and applied for a job there as a junior engineer.
And they gave me the job and they gave me a sub to go buy my uniform and whatnot.
And we had a shop down in James Street, Silvers.
And when you went down there, he kept you out with all the necessary things that you need.
And off I went with Reardon Smith.
Later on, I came home. My dad had passed away by then and my mother was hoping to take on one of the new buildings that they'd built
and open it up as a cafe to commemorate my dad.
So I had to take some time off to help her because she was getting on by then.
But it wasn't my thing, you know.
So I took time off there, a couple of years of it, and then I went back into the shipping.
And I worked for a company who employed a lot of the people from Butone.
A lot of the people had good Christmases and whatnot from this company.
A company called, it was Worldwide Marine Engineers at first, and it changed later on to Cardiff Craftsmen.
We managed to get a contract with PNORM, repairing their ships.
And, you know, I spent 30 odd years doing that.
We'd fly out. If there was an emergency or anything, they'd call us and we'd have to be ready to go like that.
And it was great because at one time there was about four of us in the team.
We all grew up together. We went to school together.
And we worked together, you know, for a long, long time.
And, you know, we just got on great with each other.
It was nice.
And we earned the respect of the PNOR offices and whatnot because they gave us a name.
The Welsh Wizards, they used to call us.
Because we used to go out and we'd perform some big jobs, you know, which were dry dock jobs, really.
But we'd do them at sea while the ship was working.
And, you know, the passengers didn't know what was going on down below.
And we saved them a lot of money.
So, and they showed their respect to us, you know.
And it was good.
And whenever we took somebody new who was from Buton, they used to say, hey, this is great, man. I made it.
One day we're in America, next day Mexico, next, you know.
And, you know, they were, I mean, an opening like that is very difficult to find.
Yeah.
But they were good boys.
And whenever we needed them to pull their socks up, they did.
And we were repaid by PNOR.
PNOR loved us, you know.
And they kept on using us until they went over to America then.
And they were bought out.
And things changed.
And the management changed.
And the whole structure of PNOR changed.
But we had 30 odd wonderful years with them.
Let me take you back.
Cairo Cafe.
That's a legend.
That's a legend in a way.
Tell me more about the Cairo.
Well, when my dad first came over to this country, he used to work in one of the boarding houses.
He was a top cook, you know.
And of course, whilst he was working in this boarding house, people started to come and eat there and it became great.
And this guy wanted my dad to marry his daughter.
And my dad wasn't too keen on it.
So he'd been saving up his coppers and whatnot.
And he had enough to rent 236 Bute Street and opened it up as the Cairo Cafe.
And in those days, he bought secondhand furniture and whatnot, you know.
And his luck was opened up there.
And he did well.
And then he was able to purchase the property.
And he went on to purchase 234, 235, and 236 four-hoses.
And inside, we had about 40 rooms, which he sort of joined them everything together.
And we had lodgers there with the Yevheny Sibin, also Mali Sibin.
And, you know, things went well for him.
And his luck turned up, but he never forgot where he came from.
Because my dad would never throw food away.
And he always taught us to respect food and not to abuse it.
And every night, all the, you know, the donor notices would turn up.
And he'd give them whatever food was left from the day.
He'd give it all to them.
And they used to come every night and line up.
And when my dad passed away, they all came as well to see him off.
And it was very sad to see them, you know.
Yeah.
But he did well.
And, you know, everybody respected him.
He had a good life.
During the war, he was in an air raid shelter.
Air raid warden.
Yeah.
You know, with many of the other people.
And they'd go out in the night searching the bomb buildings and whatnot.
And helping the people with whatever they had to do.
And, you know, no big thing was made of it.
You know, people did what they had to do.
And that was it.
It was their community.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
And like I say, people from all different nations, but everybody worked together lovely.
I mean, one of the things you're saying about your father passing and people being there.
People talk about funerals and the way people are respectful in funerals around Butown and the Bay.
Oh, yeah. Yeah.
And it doesn't matter what religion it is.
You know, everybody will come out to see the person off.
You know, the...
Well, in later years, you had Peter Phillips like he sounded a band up.
And he did like the old New Orleans type funeral where he'd be up the front in front of the hearse banging away.
And it was great.
Like, you know, it gave a little bit of spirit.
It made the funeral a little bit more cheerful.
And of course, everybody and people would carry their deceased all up Beach Street up to the as far as the church.
Because our place, we were very close to St. Mary's Church.
And, you know, everybody had come out to watch the, you know, the passing of the funeral.
Yeah. It was great.
I mean, I can remember Michael Darwin's funeral.
And they had to close the middle of town.
I don't think they realized just how seriously people took funerals.
Yeah. That's right. Yeah.
And, you know, and the people...
And that thing about burying, you know, filling in the grave.
Yeah.
Shift back. The guy's just doing it.
That's emotional, that is, I think. I think that's really special.
It is. It's a very nice thing to do for the families, respectful to the families.
Because, you know, even people from St. Mary's Church, when they were buried, they'd still fill in the...
You know, the local people would still fill in the grave once they were there.
And it sort of caught on.
And it was a great thing, you know.
I mean, I always thought of that as being a Muslim tradition.
That it shifted over.
And now that says so much about faith.
That this is the tradition of one faith.
That's right.
But people did it.
And, you know, it just shows that level of respect.
It's very, very special.
Oh, it's very special, yeah.
Very special.
I mean, there was no hatred or anything like some of the things that we have today, you know.
We've got these wild Muslims who were miseducated.
And they carry out atrocities.
None of that, them days.
It was pure Islam.
And Islam is a religion.
It means peace, you know.
I mean, to go and take somebody's life.
Or do mischief as a thing to people.
That's not looked at as very good in Islam.
But like you say, that was a tradition.
The Muslims always did it.
They're deceased.
And, you know, it was the youth of the community that carried that on to the Christian burials.
Yes, it was very nice.
Well, as you say about your dad and feeding people who had nothing.
That's another concept of Islam. Charity.
Exactly, yeah.
I mean, it doesn't matter what religion, whether you're Jewish, Christian, or Muslim.
The aim, the books are all the same.
The story in the book is exactly the same.
And, you know, it's a way of life.
And God is trying to teach us to live a good life.
And he promises us a better life in the year after.
And if we succeed, you know, so really we're all connected.
And we all come from Adam and Eve.
So we believe.
So what does that tell you?
We're all related.
So we should get on better with one another.
And literally in the Bay and Bute town, so many families have cross-married and all the rest of it.
And still people in the same family worshipping differently.
Yes, that's right.
It's amazing. You know, it's unique.